IAM
	AWS: Identity Access maanagement. .. Global (not tied to a region)
		Create users, group => permissions,  Groups policies.  
			User/ password for console, or accessKeyId / secret access key for programatic
			Can attach permissions individually, or through groups
			
			SEtup billing alert.
		Goto billing dashboard
		Setup receive billing aleryts
			click setup billing alert => CloudWatch page
			Goto Billing under alarms. Create alert

S3	
	This email is from an external source - exercise caution regarding links and attachments.
	Spread across multipe AZs
	Key value sotre.
	Key = name
	Value = data  upto 5 TB
	VersionId
	MetaData
	SubResources
		ACLs
		Torrents

	et 200 response afer success upload

	99.9 availability guarantee (built for 99.99 availability)
	99.999999999 (11 9's) durability// designed to sustain loss of 2 faclities concurently)

	Tiered storage (e.g. move after time to glacier)
	Encryption
	Control List and Bucket policie

	s3, S3IA, S3 IA 1 td, expedited, bulkaz, glacier (3 retrieveal types s,  3 - 5 hrs.
	bucket is like a folder but unique and routable to  

	bucket corresponds to url... https://s3-amazonaws.com/<name> e.g. https://s3-eu-ireland
	s3 global though??

	Data conistency
		REad after write for consistency for puts for new objects
	   Eventual consistency for update puts or deletes.. 
	read s3 faq

Cross Region Replication
    Must enable versioning
    Only changes after replication turned on are replicated, so existing bucket structure is not (use cli)
    deletes are replicated
        delete of delete flag is not (so if you undo a delete that is not transferred)
        delete of older versions is not
    Can't replicate to multiple buckets yet

Lifecycle mgmt .. versioning NOT needed
    S3 -> S3-IA -> glacier 
must be >128kb in size and 30 days (or more) after 
Can have delete rule after x time


Cloudfront => CDN
    Edge Location. Location where content will be cached  (not related to AZs or regions). Over 50 edge locations
    Origin , is origin of all files. can be S3 bucket, EC2 instance, Elastic Load Balance or route 53
        cAN HAVE MULTIPLE ORIGINS FOR A DISTRIBUTION
    
    Distribution is the CDN we create
    Web distribution for websites
    RTMP distribution for media streaming .. adobe flash
    can write to edge location i you knowit will be used.. will live until TTL expires (ttl in seconds)
    You can clear cached objects but you will be charged 

    REstrict user access. using singed urls or signed cookies
        WAf Web Application Firewall

    


CLI
aws configure
aws s3 ls   # list buckets
aws s3 cp --recursive s3://khylo s3://khylo-syd   # copy from one to another
Control List and Bucket policie

s3, S3IA, S3 IA 1 td, expedited, bulkaz, glacier (3 retrieveal types s,  3 - 5 hrs.
bucket is like a folder but unique and routable to  

bucket corresponds to url... https://s3-amazonaws.com/<name> e.g. https://s3-eu-west-1.amaonaws.com   


s3 global though??

Data conistency
    REad after write for consistency for puts for new objects
   Eventual consistency for update puts or deletes.. 
read s3 faq

Spread across multipe AZs
Key value store.
Key = name
Value = data  upto 5 TB min size 0
VersionId
MetaData
SubResources
    ACLs  Access control List (for access to objects).. Also Bucket policy for entire bucket policy
    Torrents

get 200 response after success upload
Can turn on MFA delete. Which means you have to multifactor confirm if you want to delete. Good if you want to protect against accidental deletes.

99.99 availability guarantee (built for 99.99 availability)
99.999999999 (11 9's) durability// designed to sustain loss of 2 faclities concurently)

IA Infrequent access. Pay for retrieval 
RRS Reduced Redundancy storage (is this IA 1 zone?)
    availability 99.99   Durability 99.99 (4 9s intead of 11)

Faster upload if you allow multipart files for big files.
Upload objects in a single operation—With a single PUT operation, you can upload objects up to 5 GB in size. ...
Upload objects in parts—Using the multipart upload API, you can upload large objects, up to 5 TB.
    

Tiered storage (e.g. move after time to glacier)
Encryption 4 types, client and 3 server side .. 
        sse-s3 (aes), 
        sse-kms (key managed service.. extra features and costs to a sse-s3) 
        sse- c(customer supplied keys)`

Security
    2 ways.. 
        1 Bucket policy (for all bucket)
        2 ACL .. for any object

    4 types of encryption for S3 (see above) at rest
    in transit use https


Storage Gateway
    Software appliance (virtual machine interface) that you run on premises and it copies data to Amazon S3 or glacier
    Connect via internate/ Direct Gatway of vpcs
    4 types
       1  File Gateway NFS
            files stored in S3 .. ownership, permissions and timestamps stored durably as metadata
            accessed via NFS
        Volume Gateway iSCSI  block based storage.. not S3. Like virtual harddisks.. 
        2     Stored volumes.. Appliance is gateway iSCSI between application and disks/ AWS
                Data stored on premises (you provide disks up to 15TB) and backed up incrementally to EBS
        3    Cached Volumes only most recent data stored locally.. Appliance is gateway iSCSI between application and disks/ AWS
                Data stored on premises (you provide disks up to 34TB) and backed up incrementally to S3 
        4 Tape Gateway.. Virtual Tape Library VTL can use lifecycle managment to goto glacier
            Appliance interfaces with backup software/ [latform such as Veeam, NetBackup.. ACts like a tape drive but sends data to AWS. (instead of creating loads of tapes which then need to be stored)

Running a site from S3
    Domain name and bucket name must be the same if you want to use Route53 dns routing
So url of S3 = <bucketName>.s3-website-<region>.amazonaws.com
    Under properties can set static wbsire.. Set landing page , error page and redirect rules

might be differnt for website urls.. 
See https://stackoverflow.com/questions/26604977/url-for-public-amazon-s3-bucket
My bucket is now visible as http://bucket.s3-website-us-east-1.amazonaws.com/

I see others refer to their bucket as http://s3-us-east-1.amazonaws.com/bucket/



Snowball
    Used to be Import export.. Send them physical disk and they upload it 
    Can import from S3 or export to S3
     Snowball 
        Storage appliance with security etc upto 80Tb
    Snowball Edge
        Storage and compute appliance with security etc      up to 100TB
        Can run lambda on it.. e.g. on planes. take measurements and then ship to AWS  
    Snowmobile
        Truck.. Petabyte and exabyte of data   100PB per truck 45 foot shipping container

Glacier
    For archive storage that doesn't need to be accessed. (can be but takes time and costs)
    Can Retrieve 'Expedited' but costs more and must have 'provisioned capacity' created for storage of results
	
	

EC2
    on demand   per hour or per second depending on 
        short term spike
    RI Reserved i=Instances reserved for 1 to 3 years
        Applications that require steady state predictable cpu resources
        upto 75% off if you pay in front for 3 years
        Scheduled RIs e.g. for planned bigger load days like month end  upcoming sales etc.
    Spot 
        Flexible start and end times.. Batch jobs
        if  aws terminate instance (cos price > threshold) then don't pay of fractino of hour youve used.
        If you terminate you Do pay for fraction of hour
    Dedicated hosts
        Useful for regulatory requirements that don't allow multi tenant

Host types
    Dr Mc GiftPx
    Density
    Ram
    Main choice
    Compute
    Graphics
    Iops
    FPGA
    T cheap main use e.g. t2
    Pix (Graphics)
    Xtreme Memory
now
    Fight Dr McPx
    High Disk Tru put

EBS Elastic Block Storage
So EBS volume's placed in a specific availabilities zones where they are automatically replicated to protect
    Root volumne must be either SSD.. 2 types or magnetic standard
    	- General purpose ssd GP2 ... 3IOPs per gig => 3000 IOPS for volumes 3334GB and above
        -Provisioned IOPS SSd.. For high perf >10000 IOPS

    Magnetic types
        Magnetic Standard (previous generation )
        throughput optimized HDD.. big data, data warehouse. frequenctly acessed
        sc1.. cold HDD .. less frequent. lowest cost hdd

by default EBS deleted with Ec2 instance, but can change
Additional volumes can be encryptrd. By default root can't but can by either 3rd part apps or creating custom AMI can allow you to do it	